Come everyone to the series of lectures on using auto encoders on image data.
We've already seen that even simple images are actually high dimensional data sets.
Recall that the endless dataset or even the fashion and this dataset that were simple 28 by 20 images
that actually contains then seven hundred and eighty four features and we can think of each of these
features as a dimension.
So each particular pixel is a dimension of data.
So have seven hundred eighty four features.
It might be a good idea to apply auto encoders to the sort of dataset.
So what we could do is start off with a very simple premise.
We're going to take our original image pass it through an auto encoder and then have the auto encoder
attempt to recreate the image as the output.
So essentially what it's going to do is it's going to attempt to learn what pixels are important as
it encodes it down to a smaller hidden layer and then it's going to use those important features to
attempt to reconstruct it in the decoder on the output.
So recall that those hidden layers get smaller and smaller so it's going to have to learn which pixels
per actually important for identifying image in order to reconstruct it as the output so then we would
now have an auto encoder that understands what features of the seven hundred and eighty four pixels
are important in which you're not.
For example it will likely understand that pixels on the edge don't really matter.
In fact if we take a look at a variety of the endless digital dataset images you'll notice that the
very first couple of rows at the very top and really all the pixels around the edge usually don't contain
any useful information because all these numbers are centered in the image.
So hopefully the auto encoder would learn that those particular pixels are not very valuable.
Now what we could do is do what we just did in the previous lecture and then just cut this other encoder
in half and then see what we can do with dimensionality reduction.
We can then plot this dimensionality reduction down to maybe two neurons or three neurons and then plot
out the number classes in this reduced dimensionality space and explore what numbers are similar to
what other numbers.
But in a real world case this isn't super useful because you already have the image data to begin with.
So it's an actual use case we could work with for image data that also involves auto encoders.
Well what we can do is we can use this same logic to create an auto encoder that actually removes noise
and we know that noisy images are definitely a real world problem.
So what's going to happen here is the auto encoder will learn what features are important.
So we're actually going to be able to do is using an auto encoder we will feed in a noisy version of
our number.
So we already have these clean no data set.
So we have the m this dataset all the numbers are clean and the auto unclear when it's first going to
do is as it takes in and it's input.
It's going to add in noise.
So here we can see on the left hand side we have a noisy version of that number seven and then it's
going to encode as we go deeper into these smaller hidden layers and it's going to hopefully be able
to learn what pixels are important and which are just noisy in order to reconstruct the correct number
on the output since we'll be comparing the output to the real number image and then we now have an auto
encoder that can actually deem noise images.
So we're good explorer to auto encoders we're first going to attempt to recreate the very first simple
auto encoder that just recreates input images in the output.
So it just takes an image and then encodes it and expands it back out and we'll see how well it can
do at retaining information as we reduce the number of neurons.
The second thing we're going to do is build the actual application auto encoder which removes noise
from input images to accurately reproduce output.
Let's get started by heading over to a notebook and attempting to create that first auto encoder and
it jumps to that notebook now.
All right here and at my notebook I've already gone ahead and imported pandas PD.
Now spies MP and met pup lib and the other thing I did was I also said from tense float that Chris thought
datasets import m this and I loaded up the M dataset just as he did during the coalition all neural
network section of the course.
So you can recall that you can use peel T M show to show any of these images.
So let's just grab the first training image run it.
And here we can see there was a five.
All right.
So we're going to also do is quickly scale our dataset and recall just as we did in the compositional
neural network section of course we're going to say X train is equal to x train divided by two fifty
five and we'll say x test is equal to x test divided by two fifty five.
Okay so we're already very familiar with this dataset to really cover it in more detail instead.
Let's move on to actually building out our basic auto encoder.
We'll say from tensor flow that carries that models in four sequential.
And then from tensor flow that carries the layers import dense flatten and reshape and then we'll also
use the stochastic gradient descent optimizer as we did before we'll say it tensor flow carries the
optimizer is go ahead and import s g d.
OK.
Now keep in mind there's no right or wrong way to build out this auto encoder because this falls under
kind of a semi supervised learning process because at the end of the day there's no kind of super correct
answer as far as what the encoding should have been.
Exactly.
So we're going to do is we're going to build what's known as a stacked auto encoder which means there's
actually multiple stacked hidden layers that slowly reduces the dimensionality of the data set.
So we can do is we understand that we have seven hundred eight for essentially twenty eight times twenty
eight pixels.
Right now we're going to do is we'll just keep dividing this in half.
So we'll go from seven hundred eighty four to maybe around 400 since this is equal to three ninety two.
So go from r encoder sort of a sequential and then the other thing you should recall is if we take a
look at the very first image or the way these images are constructed they are actually still retaining
their shape of 20 by 28.
So the first thing I'm going to do is we're going to flatten this out we'll say encoder ad and we're
going to first flatten this out and we'll make it aware that the input shape is twenty eight by twenty
eight.
She could always adjust that input shape to fix whatever dimensions you're working with for your own
images.
So we first flatten it out.
So we have it now seven hundred eighty four.
And then we're going to do is we're going to add in a dense layer that goes from seven hundred and eighty
four.
Now let's go ahead and cut that about half to 400 neurons and we'll set for activation function equal
to a rectified linear unit and we're going to keep doing this in order to make this a stacked auto encoder.
It's probably too much to ask to just go from seven hundred eighty four down to something like twenty
five dimensions.
So we'll do this slowly that way the encoding half of the auto encoder can actually attempt to kind
of slowly learn this dimensionality reduction so then we'll go from four hundred to two hundred and
then let's cut then a half again we'll go from two hundred to one hundred and then cut that in half
again.
They'll go from one hundred to let's say 50 and then we'll go into that one more time.
So we go down from 50 to twenty five OK.
And again this kind of just an arbitrary choice of how far down we're gonna go here.
So now I'm going down from seven hundred eighty four to twenty five which if I think about that in terms
of a percent I'm actually going down to just 3 percent of the size.
So I'm going from seven hundred eighty four dimensions down to twenty five dimensions which is around
three point two percent of the original feature size.
So we have some handy for dimensions we're going down to three point two percent of that which is twenty
five neurons.
So this is kind of impressive already especially if it's able to recreate after it goes through the
decoder.
So let's build out our decoder just as we did before we'll use a sequential model and then we'll say
decoder ad it's going to take condense.
And here we're essentially going to build out the reverse of the encoder.
Keep in mind we're not going to duplicate this very last one because that's the centre hidden layer.
So the very first layer in the decoder should match the second to last layer in the encoder which is
going to be 50.
So right in the middle it's going to have that twenty five neurons and expand back out to mirror the
encoder so then it goes from 50 here and then we're going to specify is the input shape is equal to
twenty five.
So that kind of shows the connection here between the encoder and the decoder.
So we have the input shape as equals twenty five.
And then finally let's say that the activation function is equal to a rectified linear unit.
OK.
So that's the very first layer and the decoder.
And now we're just going to mirror our encoder.
So add in in other dense layer and then we'll go back out to from 50 to 100 and say the activation function
is a rectified linear unit and then I'll just copy and paste this and expand it back out to the original
seven hundred and eighty four.
So a 50 to 100 to 200 add in one more 200 to 400.
And then finally we'll go from 400 to the original which is either you can type out twenty eight times
twenty eight which is OK or you can say seven hundred and eighty four.
The important thing to note here is that this activation is going to change to sigmoid and the other
important thing to note here is we need to compare this to the actual original images.
So we'll say decoder ad and we're going to reshape this to be 28 by 28 in order to successfully compare
the input of 28 by 28 to the output.
That should also be 28 by 20.
After going through the auto encoder and the reason we have sigmoid as our final activation function
is because we essentially are performing a binary cross entropy loss at the end of our auto encoder
we're just checking does the final output image after going through the entire auto encoder match the
true image that we suspect it to be.
So what does that actually look like.
Well we take our auto encoder and build it by saying sequential model just as we did before we pass
in the encoder and the decoder and then to compile it we'll say compile and loss is equal to binary
cross entropy and it's binary across entropy because the auto encoder doesn't really care how many distinct
types of numbers are.
It doesn't care that there's 10 classes of numbers all the auto encoder cares about is is the image
I'm producing at the output going to match the image that was originally put into the input.
So that's why it's just sigmoid and binary across entropy.
And then we'll go ahead and specify our optimizer and this is something you can play around with especially
for your own data sets.
So that's why we use the classic gradient descent and you can play around that learning rate then you
can always slow down your learning rate by giving a smaller value if you notice your reproductions are
pretty off or if your training is taking too much time.
You can always experiment with increasing the learning rate by giving a larger value to hopefully learn
faster.
So we discussed that in our original theory lectures all the way towards the beginning of this course.
And then finally let's go ahead and keep metrics and we're gonna keep track of accuracy instead of just
our loss.
So there's our accuracy.
And then finally we'll say auto encoder and let's go ahead and fit this model.
We're simply going to pass in X train next train.
And again the actual train test split is kind of irrelevant here because this is just an auto encoder.
And here's why again it's called a I supervised learning process because it's not like we're trying
to actually perform some sort of classification task here.
Instead all we're trying to do is see if this auto encoder is able to learn what features are important
as it encodes the information to a smaller dimensionality.
Remember it's just three point two percent of the space with twenty five neurons and then expand that
back out.
So that's why I'm just passing an extra X train when we pass and fit.
That's really both the x and the Y is just is the image number one equal to image number one from X
train.
Okay so then we'll go ahead and train this for let's say five epochs and we've got to do is pass in
validation data.
So if you want to just check its performance so to speak on data it's not actually being trained on
to reproduce.
That's what you can do with the test set by saying X test x test.
But again that train test split is not a fundamental part of this process so we'll go ahead and fit
this.
And I'm going to fast forward in time until the auto encoder is done fitting all right.
This finished train for me.
Now let's go ahead and see how we can use the auto encoder and take a look at what the images look like
after they've been passed through the auto encoder so we can do here is we can say past images and let's
go ahead and just grab a batch from the Tesla will say auto encoder predict and say X test go ahead
just pass and if you want ten of those.
And so we're doing is replacing 10 images that the auto encoder was not trained on.
And then we're asking the auto encoder to quote unquote predict and predicting for this auto encoder
really just means attempt to reconstruct the image after reducing its dimensionality down to twenty
five neurons.
So let's see how well of a job at that first.
Let's go ahead and view what one of the original images looks like.
So we'll say P.L. T M show and in fact let's do a couple of things there we'll say n is equal to zero.
So that's something to play around with and we'll show why in a second we'll say appeal T M show and
then we'll say from X test grab n and then we'll say peel t show here and right below it we'll say appeal
t n show and we'll say is past images of n and let's add in a little label here so we'll print out original
image and then we'll print out attempted reconstruction of it.
And this is technically after it's gone through the entire auto encoder again all we're doing here is
we're comparing the original image and what the image would look like after being passed through the
entire auto encoder.
So we're doing this just for the first image for n zero run that.
So here's our original image seven and this is what it looks like after being reconstructed.
So is this impressive or not.
Notice the seven looks a little blurrier but you should realize here that this is actually extremely
impressive because what the auto encoder was able to do is it squeezed down the seven hundred and eighty
four features or dimensions down to just twenty five and then was able to then expand that back out
to recreate what essentially looks like the original image.
And this allows you to then play around with the value of n.
You can choose another one let's say n is equal to three.
Check out that third image.
And here is the original image.
Looks like a zero and then here it is after being passed through the other encoder so you can see that
the auto encoder is almost acting like kind of blur functionality.
We're just checking what it looks to be important in order to reconstruct the image we're going to do
and essentially Part 2 of this lecture series is build out an auto encoder for D noisier images.
So we'll continue right where we left off in part two.
I'll see you there.